A2X(1)
======


NAME
----
a2x - convert Asciidoc text file to PDF, EPUB, XHTML, HTML Help,
manpage or plain text


SYNOPSIS
--------
*a2x* ['OPTIONS'] 'FILE'


DESCRIPTION
-----------
A DocBook toolchain wrapper script that translates an AsciiDoc text
file 'FILE' to PDF, DVI, PS, LaTeX, XHTML (single page or chunked),
man page, HTML Help or plain text formats. PDF, XHTML, man page and
HTML Help formats are are generated using the asciidoc(1),
xsltproc(1), DocBook XSL Stylesheets, dblatex (or FOP) toolchain.
Plain text is produced by passing asciidoc(1) generated HTML through
lynx(1). The htmlhelp format option generates .hhp, .hhc and .html
files suitable for compilation to an HTML Help .chm file.


OPTIONS
-------
*-a, --attribute*='ATTRIBUTE'::
  Set asciidoc(1) attribute value (shortcut for *--asciidoc-opts*='"-a
  ATTRIBUTE"' option).  This option may be specified more than once.

*--asciidoc-opts*='ASCIIDOC_OPTS'::
  Additional asciidoc(1) options.  This option may be specified more
  than once.

*-D, --destination-dir*='PATH'::
  Output directory. Defaults to source 'FILE' directory.

*-d, --doctype*='DOCTYPE'::
  DocBook document type: 'article', 'manpage' or 'book'.  Default
  document type is 'article' unless the format is 'manpage' (in which
  case it defaults to 'manpage').

*-f, --format*='FORMAT'::
  Output formats: 'chunked', 'docbook', 'dvi', 'epub', 'htmlhelp',
  'manpage', 'pdf', 'ps', 'tex', 'text', 'xhtml'.

*-h, --help*::
  Print command-line syntax and program options to stdout.

*--icons*::
  Use admonition or navigation icon images in output documents. The
  default behavior is to use text in place of icons.

*--icons-dir*='PATH'::
  A path (relative to output files) containing admonition
  and navigation icons. Defaults to 'images/icons'.
  The '--icons' option is implicit if this option is used.

*--lynx*::
  Use 'lynx(1)' to generate text formatted output. The default
  behavior is to use 'w3m(1)'.

*-L, --no-xmllint*::
  Do not check asciidoc output with 'xmllint'.

*---epubcheck*::
  Check EPUB output with 'epubcheck'.

*-n, --dry-run*::
  Do not do anything just print what would have been done.

*-r, --resource-dir*='PATH'::
  If a relative image or CSS resource is not found relative to the
  AsciiDoc source 'FILE' then search the 'PATH' recursively. This
  option may be specified more than once.

*-s, --skip-asciidoc*::
  Skip asciidoc execution. This is useful for converting DocBook XML
  files not derived from AsciiDoc sources.

*--stylesheet*='PATH'::
  A path (relative to destination HTML files) specifying the
  docbook-xsl CSS stylesheet file. Defaults to 'docbook-xsl.css'.
  Applies to HTML formats: 'xhtml', 'epub', 'chunked', 'htmlhelp'
  formats.

*-v, --verbose*::
  Print operational details to stderr.
  A second *-v* option applies the verbose option to toolchain commands.

*--safe*::
  Use the asciidoc(1) *--safe* option.

*--version*::
  Print program version to stdout.

*--xsltproc-opts*='XSLTPROC_OPTS'::
  Additional xsltproc(1) options.  This option may be specified more
  than once.

*--fop*::
  Use FOP to generate PDFs. The default behavior is to use
  'dblatex(1)'.

*--fop-opts*='FOP_OPTS'::
  Additional fop options.  This option may be specified more than
  once. If this option is specified FOP is used to generate PDFs.

*--dblatex-opts*='DBLATEX_OPTS'::
  Additional dblatex options.  This option may be specified more than once.


OUTPUT FILES
------------
Output files are written to the directory specified by the
*--destination-dir* option. If no *--destination-dir* option is set
output files are written to the source FILE directory.

Output files have the same name as the source 'FILE' but with an
appropriate file name extension: .html for 'xhtml'; .epub for
'epub'; .hhp for 'htmlhelp'; .pdf for 'pdf'; .text for 'text', .xml
for 'docbook'. By convention manpages have no .man extension (man page
section number only).  Chunked HTML directory names have a .chunked
extension; chunked HTML Help directory names have a .htmlhelp
extension.

Same named existing files are overwritten.

In addition to generating HTML files the 'xhtml', 'epub', 'chunked'
and 'htmlhelp' formats copy images and CSS stylesheet files referenced
in the generated HTML outputs from locations relative to the asciidoc
input 'FILE' to the correct relative destination directory locations
generating sub-directories if neccessary. See also the
'--resource-dir' option.


EXAMPLES
--------
`a2x -f pdf doc/source-highlight-filter.txt`::
  Generates doc/source-highlight-filter.pdf file.

`a2x -f xhtml -D ../doc --icons -r ../images team.txt`::
  Creates single HTML file `../doc/team.html`, uses admonition icons
  and searches `../images` for any missing resources.

`a2x -f manpage doc/asciidoc.1.txt`::
  Generate `doc/asciidoc.1` manpage.

REQUISITES
----------
This script runs under the bash(1) shell and requires the following
programs (which may or may not be prepackaged with your Linux
distribution):

Asciidoc::
  http://www.methods.co.nz/asciidoc/

xsltproc::
  http://xmlsoft.org/XSLT/

DocBook XSL Stylesheets::
  http://docbook.sourceforge.net/projects/xsl/

dblatex (for PDF, DVI, PostScript and LaTeX file generation)::
  http://dblatex.sourceforge.net/

FOP (alternative PDF file generation)::
  http://xmlgraphics.apache.org/fop/

w3m (text file generation)::
  http://w3m.sourceforge.net/index.en.html

Lynx (used for text file generation if `w3m(1)` not installed)::
  http://lynx.isc.org/

See also the latest README file.


BUGS
----
See the AsciiDoc distribution BUGS file.


AUTHOR
------
Written by Stuart Rackham, <srackham@gmail.com>


RESOURCES
---------
SourceForge: http://sourceforge.net/projects/asciidoc/

Main web site: http://www.methods.co.nz/asciidoc/


COPYING
-------
Copyright \(C) 2002-2009 Stuart Rackham. Free use of this software is
granted under the terms of the MIT license.

